.\" nftgeo-ui(8) manual page
.TH NFTGEO-UI 8 "2026-07-12" "nftgeo 1.72.9" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
nftgeo-ui \- local nftgeo dashboard and policy editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nftgeo-ui
.RB [ -addr " address" ]
.RB [ -noauth ]
.br
.B nftgeo-ui token
.RB [ -ro ]
.RB [ -addr " address" ]
.RB [ -ttl " duration" ]
.RB [ -raw ]
.br
.B nftgeo-ui reconcile-boot
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nftgeo-ui
serves a dashboard for the live nftgeo table, counters, source health, drop
events, and policy files. Its editor stages changes and deploys them through
the same validation, plan, and confirmation-deadman flow as
.BR nftgeo (8).
.PP
The packaged
.B nftgeo-ui.service
runs as root and listens only on 127.0.0.1:8787. Keep that default and use an
SSH tunnel or an authenticated TLS reverse proxy for remote access. The service
needs root access to nftables, logs, state, and policy files.
.SH SERVER OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -addr " address"
Listen address in Go host:port form. Default: 127.0.0.1:8787.
.TP
.B -noauth
Disable token authentication. Use only on a trusted local-only listener. Never
combine this option with a public or broadly reachable bind address.
.SH TOKEN COMMAND
.B nftgeo-ui token
mints a signed bootstrap token and prints a dashboard URL. It must be able to
read or create the root-owned signing secret.
.TP
.B -ro
Create a long-lived read-only token. It cannot change firewall policy.
.TP
.BI -addr " address"
Use this address in the printed URL. It does not change the server listener.
Default: 127.0.0.1:8787.
.TP
.BI -ttl " duration"
Override token validity using a Go duration such as 10m, 24h, or 168h.
.TP
.B -raw
Print only the token, without a URL or terminal formatting.
.PP
Read-write bootstrap tokens default to ten minutes and are single-use. After
exchange, the browser receives an HttpOnly session cookie. Read-only tokens
default to 90 days. Active session expiry is controlled separately by
.BR UI_SESSION_TTL .
.PP
When accessed through HTTPS, the session cookie is marked Secure. A TLS
reverse proxy must pass the
.B X-Forwarded-Proto: https
header to the local service.
.SH RECONCILE-BOOT COMMAND
.B nftgeo-ui reconcile-boot
restores policy backups after a reboot interrupted an unconfirmed dashboard
deployment and removes stale confirmation state. It is an internal, idempotent
boot helper called by
.BR nftgeo.service .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B UI_SECRET_FILE
HMAC signing-secret path. Default: /var/lib/nftgeo/ui-secret.
.TP
.B UI_SESSION_TTL
Authenticated browser-session inactivity timeout. Default: 15m.
.TP
.BR NFTGEO_BIN , " " NFTGEO_UPDATE
Paths to the operator CLI and generation engine. Defaults:
/usr/sbin/nftgeo and /usr/sbin/nftgeo-update.
.TP
.BR CONFIG_FILE , " " RULES_FILE , " " RULES_DIR
Override the policy files shown and edited by the dashboard.
.TP
.BR INGRESS_FILE , " " INGRESS_DIR , " " GROUPS_DIR
Override ingress and object-definition locations.
.TP
.BR WHITELIST_FILE , " " WHITELIST_HOSTS_FILE
Override whitelist file locations.
.TP
.BR TABLE_FAMILY , " " TABLE_NAME
Table inspected by the dashboard. Defaults: inet and nftgeo.
.TP
.BR STATE_DIR , " " ZONE_DIR , " " ABUSE_FEEDS_CACHE_DIR
Override runtime state and cache locations.
.TP
.B NFLOG_GROUP
Netfilter log group used for live drop events. It should match the engine
configuration. Default: 5; 0 disables NFLOG ingestion.
.TP
.BR GEO_FULL , " " GEO_CACHE_DIR
Optional complete geo dataset URL and dashboard geo-cache directory.
.SH SECURITY
Authentication protects the HTTP interface but does not replace network
isolation. Do not publish the default HTTP listener directly on an untrusted
network. Treat read-write token URLs as credentials and do not place them in
logs, issues, screenshots, or shell history shared with others.
.PP
The packaged systemd unit uses filesystem restrictions but grants write access
to
.I /etc/nftgeo
and
.I /etc/nftables.d
so confirmed policy changes can be installed.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/system/nftgeo-ui.service
Packaged service unit.
.TP
.I /var/lib/nftgeo/ui-secret
Root-owned signing secret.
.TP
.IR /var/lib/nftgeo/ui-drafts/ , " " /var/lib/nftgeo/ui-backups/
Staged policy and rollback copies.
.TP
.I /var/lib/nftgeo/status.json
Engine health and source freshness displayed by the dashboard.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/
Live policy edited through the draft and confirmation workflow.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start the packaged local dashboard and mint a read-write login link:
.PP
.RS
.nf
systemctl enable --now nftgeo-ui.service
nftgeo-ui token
.fi
.RE
.PP
Access it from an administrator workstation without exposing the listener:
.PP
.RS
.nf
ssh -L 8787:127.0.0.1:8787 server.example
# then mint/open a token for 127.0.0.1:8787
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a seven-day read-only token containing no terminal decoration:
.PP
.RS
.nf
nftgeo-ui token -ro -ttl 168h -raw
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nftgeo (8),
.BR nftgeo.conf (5),
.BR nftgeo-update (8),
.BR ssh (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR systemd.service (5)
