.\" nftgeo.conf(5) manual page
.TH NFTGEO.CONF 5 "2026-07-19" "nftgeo 1.74.0~beta.2" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
nftgeo.conf \- configuration and rule file formats for nftgeo
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/nftgeo/config
.br
.I /etc/nftgeo/groups.d/*.conf
.br
.I /etc/nftgeo/rules.conf
.br
.I /etc/nftgeo/rules.d/*.conf
.br
.I /etc/nftgeo/ingress.conf
.br
.I /etc/nftgeo/ingress.d/*.conf
.br
.I /etc/nftgeo/whitelist.conf
.br
.I /etc/nftgeo/whitelist-hosts.conf
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nftgeo-update
sources the main configuration and sorted
.I groups.d
fragments as POSIX shell syntax, then parses the filter, NAT, zone, throttle,
synproxy, and ingress rule files. The generated ruleset is validated with
.B nft -c
before it is loaded.
.PP
Keep configuration files root-owned. They are executed as shell input by a
root service and must not be writable by untrusted users. Quote values that
contain whitespace. Blank lines and lines beginning with
.B #
are ignored in rule and list files.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The following settings are intended for
.IR /etc/nftgeo/config .
Path, table, and state variables used for isolated testing are documented under
.B ENVIRONMENT
in
.BR nftgeo-update (8).
.SS Whitelist and name resolution
.TP
.B WHITELIST
Space-separated literal IPv4/IPv6 addresses or CIDRs that bypass geo, abuse,
throttle, synproxy, and policy drops. Entries in
.I whitelist.conf
take precedence when that file is non-empty.
.TP
.B WHITELIST_HOSTS
Space-separated hostnames resolved on each update. Entries in
.I whitelist-hosts.conf
take precedence when that file is non-empty.
.TP
.B WHITELIST_HOSTS_RETENTION_DAYS
Keep the last successful addresses for a hostname this many days after
resolution fails. Default: 7.
.TP
.B RESOLVERS
Space-separated resolvers tried in order. The word
.B local
uses the system resolver; an IP address requests that DNS server directly.
Default: local.
.TP
.B RESOLVE_TIMEOUT
Timeout in seconds for each resolver attempt. Default: 5.
.SS Geo data
.TP
.B ZONE_CACHE_HOURS
Maximum age of downloaded country-zone data before refresh. Default: 20.
.TP
.BI REGION_ NAME
Space-separated ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country codes defining a named region.
Names are referenced lowercased in rules. The built-ins are
.BR europe ,
.BR north_america ,
.BR caribbean ,
.BR south_america ,
.BR middle_east ,
.BR asia ,
.BR africa ,
and
.BR oceania ;
an assignment with the same name overrides a built-in.
.SS Abuse sources
.TP
.B ABUSEIPDB_API_KEY
API key used to download the AbuseIPDB blacklist. It is read only when at least
one rule targets
.BR abuse .
.TP
.BR ABUSEIPDB_CONFIDENCE_MINIMUM , " " ABUSEIPDB_LIMIT , " " ABUSEIPDB_DAYS
AbuseIPDB request filters. Defaults: 90, 10000, and 30 respectively.
.TP
.B ABUSEIPDB_RETENTION_DAYS
Age in days after which addresses absent from successful API responses are
discarded. Defaults to
.BR ABUSEIPDB_DAYS .
.TP
.B ABUSE_FEEDS
Space- or newline-separated URLs of plaintext IP/CIDR feeds merged into the
.B abuse
sets. The last good copy of each feed is cached.
.TP
.B ABUSE_FEEDS_MAX
Maximum entries retained from one feed; 0 disables the limit. Default: 200000.
.TP
.B ABUSE_FEEDS_AGGREGATE
Set to 1 to collapse adjacent addresses into CIDRs before loading. Default: 1.
.TP
.BR ABUSE_FEEDS_BATCH , " " ABUSE_FEEDS_BATCH_SLEEP
When the batch size is non-zero and an abuse set is larger than it, initially
load the ruleset with an empty set and fill it in paced chunks. The default
batch size is 0 (atomic loading); sleep defaults to 1 second. Batching reduces
netlink pressure but protection ramps up during the fill window.
.SS Base policy and logging
.TP
.BR DEFAULT_INPUT , " " DEFAULT_OUTPUT , " " DEFAULT_FORWARD
Base chain policy,
.B accept
or
.BR drop .
All default to
.BR accept .
With a drop policy, explicitly allow required SSH, DNS, update, and forwarding
traffic before deployment. Use
.BR "nftgeo apply --confirm" .
.TP
.B HARDEN
A non-empty value enables baseline loopback acceptance, invalid-state drops,
essential ICMPv6, and inbound ping rate limiting.
.TP
.BR ICMP_RATE , " " ICMP_BURST
Ping limit used by
.BR HARDEN .
Defaults: 1/second and 5. Set
.B ICMP_RATE=0
to disable ping limiting.
.TP
.B ANTISPOOF
Space-separated ingress interfaces protected by an IPv4 reverse-path
.B fib
check.
.TP
.B LOG_DROPS
A non-empty value logs dropped packets.
.TP
.B LOG_WHITELIST
A non-empty value logs whitelist hits independently of
.BR LOG_DROPS .
.TP
.BR LOG_PREFIX , " " LOG_LIMIT
Drop-log prefix and nftables rate expression. Defaults are
.B "nftgeo-drop "
and
.BR "limit rate 10/second" .
.TP
.B NFLOG_GROUP
Netfilter log multicast group consumed by the dashboard. Set to 0 to use only
the kernel log. Default: 5.
.TP
.B THROTTLE_BAN
Default duration for reactive throttle bans. Default: 1h.
.TP
.B SEGMENT_DEFAULT
Set to
.B deny
to drop forwarding between defined zones unless a zone rule allows it. Empty
by default.
.TP
.B INGRESS_DEV
Space- or comma-separated interfaces on which ingress-hook rules are attached.
When empty, the default-route interface is detected.
.SH OBJECTS
Object assignments may be placed in the main config or in sorted
.IR groups.d/*.conf
fragments.
.TP
.BI GROUP_ NAME
Reusable list of IPs, CIDRs, countries, and regions. Groups cannot include
other groups.
.TP
.BI HOST_ NAME
Reusable list of literal IPs or CIDRs associated with a host label.
.TP
.BI SERVICE_ NAME
Reusable list of ports, ranges, service names, and optionally protocol-tagged
members such as
.BR 53/udp .
Services may include other services. User definitions override built-in names.
.TP
.BI ZONE_ NAME
Space-separated interface names defining a network segment. VLAN interface
names are accepted.
.PP
Object names are the lowercased suffix after the underscore. For example,
.B GROUP_OFFICE
is referenced as
.BR office .
.SH FILTER RULES
Filter rules in
.I rules.conf
and sorted
.I rules.d/*.conf
have this form:
.PP
.RS
.nf
<allow|deny> <dir> <proto> <port> <target> [on <iface>] [log]
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B dir
One of
.BR in ,
.BR out ,
.BR fwd-in ,
or
.BR fwd-out .
.TP
.B proto
One of
.BR tcp ,
.BR udp ,
.BR sctp ,
.BR all ,
.BR icmp ,
.BR icmpv6 ,
.BR esp ,
.BR ah ,
.BR gre ,
or
.BR any .
.B all
means TCP and UDP. Port-less protocols and
.B any
use
.B -
for the port.
.TP
.B port
A number, range, comma-separated list, built-in service name, or
.B SERVICE_
object name. A
.B -
matches every port/protocol where applicable.
.TP
.B target
A comma-separated mixture of country codes, region names, literal IPs/CIDRs,
.B GROUP_
names,
.B HOST_
names, or
.BR any .
The reserved target
.B abuse
is valid only for deny rules.
.TP
.BI "on " iface
Restrict the rule to an interface.
.TP
.B log
Log matches for this rule. A trailing
.B # comment
is used as its log name.
.SS Evaluation
Rules are evaluated top-to-bottom across the main file and sorted fragments;
the first matching user rule wins. The fixed baseline is evaluated first:
loopback and established/related acceptance as applicable, invalid-state drop,
whitelist, throttle, and synproxy.
.PP
An allow rule does not implicitly close a port. Under
.B DEFAULT_INPUT=accept
write a following catch-all deny when a service must be limited:
.PP
.RS
.nf
allow in tcp 22 europe
deny  in tcp 22 any
.fi
.RE
.SH INGRESS RULES
Ingress rules in
.I ingress.conf
and sorted
.I ingress.d/*.conf
run before prerouting and connection tracking:
.PP
.RS
.nf
<accept|drop> <target> [proto] [port] [log]
.fi
.RE
.PP
They match source addresses and are stateless. The whitelist is accepted before
all ingress drops. Targets are the same as filter-rule targets. This optional
hook requires Linux 5.10 or newer and an interface selected by
.BR INGRESS_DEV .
.SH SPECIAL RULES
.SS Reactive throttle
.RS
.nf
throttle <in|fwd-in> <tcp|udp> <port> <N/second|minute|hour> \
         [ban <duration>] [on <iface>]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Sources exceeding the new-connection rate are temporarily blocked. Whitelisted
sources are immune.
.SS SYN proxy
.RS
.nf
synproxy <in|fwd-in> tcp <port> [on <iface>]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Proxy the TCP handshake in the kernel before allow rules.
.SS NAT
.RS
.nf
masquerade on <wan> [in <lan>]
snat out on <wan> to <ip> [in <lan>]
dnat <proto> <port> to <ip>[:<port>] [from <target>] [on <iface>]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Routing also requires the appropriate kernel IP-forwarding setting.
.SS Zones
.RS
.nf
<allow|deny> <source-zone> -> <destination-zone> <proto> <port> \
             [from <target>]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Zone names reference
.B ZONE_
objects and match input/output interfaces in the forward chain.
.SH LIST FILES
.I whitelist.conf
contains one literal IP or CIDR per line.
.I whitelist-hosts.conf
contains one hostname per line. In both files, whitespace is trimmed and
.B #
starts a comment. A non-empty file is authoritative over its corresponding
legacy config variable.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/config
Main shell-syntax configuration. Recommended mode: 0600.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/config.example
Packaged configuration template with comments and defaults.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/groups.d/*.conf
Sorted shell-syntax object fragments.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/rules.conf
Main policy file.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/rules.d/*.conf
Sorted policy fragments.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/ingress.conf
Main early-ingress policy file.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/ingress.d/*.conf
Sorted early-ingress fragments.
.TP
.IR /etc/nftgeo/whitelist.conf , " " /etc/nftgeo/whitelist-hosts.conf
Authoritative whitelist files when non-empty.
.SH EXAMPLES
Protect SSH by country while preserving an administrator address:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# /etc/nftgeo/whitelist.conf
203.0.113.10

# /etc/nftgeo/rules.conf
allow in tcp 22 pl
deny  in tcp 22 any
.fi
.RE
.PP
Define reusable objects and a strict output policy:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# /etc/nftgeo/groups.d/site.conf
GROUP_DNS="1.1.1.1 9.9.9.9"
SERVICE_WEB="80 443"

# /etc/nftgeo/config
DEFAULT_OUTPUT="drop"

# /etc/nftgeo/rules.conf
allow out udp 53 dns
allow out tcp web any
.fi
.RE
.PP
Validate and deploy with automatic rollback:
.PP
.RS
.nf
nftgeo validate
nftgeo plan
nftgeo apply --confirm 300
# verify access from a second session
nftgeo apply --commit
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nftgeo (8),
.BR nftgeo-update (8),
.BR nftgeo-ui (8),
.BR nft (8),
.BR systemd.service (5)
