.\" nftgeo-qos(8) manual page
.TH NFTGEO-QOS 8 "2026-07-21" "nftgeo" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
nftgeo-qos \- apply nftgeo egress traffic shaping with Linux tc
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nftgeo qos
.I command
.br
.B nftgeo-qos
.RB [ --config " " file ]
.RB [ --state " " file ]
.I command
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nftgeo-qos
turns packet marks emitted by nftgeo filter rules into Linux traffic-control
classes. It manages one egress interface with an HTB root qdisc, one
.B fq_codel
leaf qdisc per class, and a firewall-mark filter for every class.
.PP
The configuration is
.IR /etc/nftgeo/qos.conf .
It is disabled by default. This beta intentionally shapes only traffic leaving
the selected interface. It does not claim to shape downloads or other ingress
traffic: reliable ingress shaping requires an IFB device and is outside this
profile.
.PP
Applying QoS replaces the root qdisc on the configured interface. Use it only
on an interface whose existing traffic-control configuration nftgeo may manage.
The tool records its ownership in
.IR /run/nftgeo/qos.json ;
.B clear
only removes a qdisc with that recorded ownership.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B validate
Parse and validate the configuration without changing the host.
.TP
.B plan
Print the exact
.B tc
commands that would be run.
.TP
.B apply
Install the HTB classes, fq_codel leaves, and mark filters. Requires root and
the
.B tc
program from iproute2.
.TP
.B clear
Remove a qdisc previously installed by nftgeo-qos. Requires root.
.TP
.B status
Show the configured profile and live tc qdisc, class, and filter state.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.nf
enabled yes
interface eth0
bandwidth 100mbit
default standard
class voice    mark 10 rate 20% ceil 100% priority 0
class standard mark 20 rate 50% ceil 100% priority 3
class bulk     mark 30 rate 10% ceil 80%  priority 7
.fi
.PP
.B bandwidth
is the interface egress capacity. Rates may be absolute values accepted by tc
(for example
.BR 20mbit )
or percentages of bandwidth. Each class's ceiling must be at least its rate
and no greater than bandwidth. Marks and class names must be unique. The
default class is used for unmarked traffic.
.PP
Set the corresponding mark on an accepted nftgeo rule, for example:
.nf
allow out udp 5060-5070 any mark 10 # voice
allow out tcp 443 any mark 20        # interactive web
.fi
.PP
Rules must be deployed through the normal nftgeo deadman workflow before the
matching QoS profile is enabled.
.SH SYSTEMD
After validating a profile, enable it at boot and apply it now with:
.nf
systemctl enable --now nftgeo-qos.service
.fi
.PP
Stopping the unit clears only the qdisc recorded as managed by nftgeo-qos.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
# Verify the profile and inspect the generated tc commands first.
nftgeo qos validate
nftgeo qos plan

# After deploying the matching nftgeo rules, apply QoS now and at boot.
systemctl enable --now nftgeo-qos.service
nftgeo qos status
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/qos.conf
QoS profile.
.TP
.I /run/nftgeo/qos.json
Runtime ownership state for the managed qdisc.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nftgeo (8),
.BR nftgeo.conf (5),
.BR tc (8)
