.\" nftgeo(8) manual page
.TH NFTGEO 8 "2026-07-10" "nftgeo 1.72.1" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
nftgeo \- declarative geo / abuse / segmentation firewall for nftables
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nftgeo
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.br
.B nftgeo-update
.RB [ --version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nftgeo
builds and maintains an
.BR nftables (8)
ruleset in the
.B inet nftgeo
table from a small declarative configuration. You describe, per port and
direction, which countries, regions, networks or hosts are allowed or denied;
the engine resolves geo data, an optional AbuseIPDB / feed blocklist, and a
whitelist into a single atomically-loaded ruleset.
.PP
.B nftgeo
is the operator CLI documented here.
.B nftgeo-update
is the generation engine it drives; it is normally run by the
.B nftgeo.service
systemd unit and its twice-daily
.BR nftgeo.timer .
.PP
Beyond geo filtering the engine also supports reactive brute-force throttling,
a default-deny input policy, egress and ingress NAT (masquerade / SNAT / DNAT
port-forward), and an internal firewall of interface-based zones with optional
default-deny segmentation.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI "check " ip
Show what the firewall does to an address: whitelist / abuse / geo set
membership, the rules that match it, and the resulting verdict.
.TP
.B status
One-screen summary: version, last run, set sizes, drop counters, feed health,
and the next scheduled run.
.TP
.B validate
Render the ruleset from the current config and check it with
.B nft -c
without loading it. Exits non-zero if the config is invalid. Requires root.
.TP
.B plan
Show how the rendered ruleset differs from what is loaded, as a policy diff
(set contents elided). Requires root.
.TP
.BI "block " "ip " [ ttl ]
Drop an address immediately for
.I ttl
(default 1h; e.g.\& 30m, 2d) without editing rules or reloading. Refuses a
whitelisted address or your own SSH source unless
.B --force
is given. The block survives engine updates. Requires root.
.TP
.BI "unblock " ip
Remove a dynamic block. Requires root.
.TP
.B blocklist
List the current dynamic blocks and their remaining TTL.
.TP
.B apply
Rebuild and load the ruleset now (runs the update engine). Requires root.
.TP
.BI "apply --confirm " [ T ]
Apply, then automatically roll back after
.I T
seconds (default 120) unless confirmed \(em a deadman switch against a change
that locks you out. Requires root.
.TP
.BR "apply --commit" ", " confirm
Keep a
.B --confirm
apply by cancelling the pending rollback. Requires root.
.TP
.B rollback
Restore the previous ruleset generation. Requires root.
.TP
.B version
Print the nftgeo version.
.TP
.B help
Show a usage summary.
.SH RULES
Rules live in
.I /etc/nftgeo/rules.conf
and
.IR /etc/nftgeo/rules.d/*.conf ,
one per line. Blank lines and lines starting with
.B #
are ignored; a trailing
.B "# text"
names the rule (used in drop logs).
.SS Filter rules
.nf
.B "<allow|deny> <dir> <proto> <port> <target> [on <iface>] [log]"
.fi
.TP
.B dir
.BR in ", " out ", " fwd-in ", " fwd-out
(input, output, or the two forward directions).
.TP
.B proto
.BR tcp ", " udp ", " sctp ", " all " (port-based); " icmp ", " icmpv6 ", " esp ", " ah ", " gre " (port-less, use " - "); " any .
.TP
.B port
A single port, a range
.RB ( 5060-5070 ),
a list
.RB ( 80,443 ),
a service name (a built-in well-known service such as
.BR https ,
.BR dns ,
.BR rdp ,
or a
.BI SERVICE_ NAME
defined in the config, which overrides a built-in of the same name), or
.B -
(equivalently an empty field) which matches
.I every
port of the protocol \(em for port-less protocols, and for
.BR tcp / udp / sctp / all
to mean all ports (rendered with
.BR "meta l4proto" ).
.B "nftgeo-update --services"
lists the built-in service names.
.TP
.B target
Any comma-separated mix of country code
.RB ( pl ),
region
.RB ( europe ),
literal IPv4/IPv6 address or CIDR, a
.BI GROUP_ NAME
list, a
.BI HOST_ NAME
label, the word
.B any
, or (with
.B deny
only) the AbuseIPDB blacklist keyword
.BR abuse .
.PP
Rules are evaluated top-to-bottom in file order, first match wins (after a
fixed baseline: loopback, invalid-state drop, established/related, whitelist,
throttle, synproxy). There is no automatic deny-by-default: to close a port to
everyone
except a target,
.B allow
the target and then add a catch-all
.B "deny <dir> <proto> <port> any"
below it (or set
.BR DEFAULT_INPUT=drop ).
.B validate
warns about a geo-restricted
.B allow
left open this way;
.B "nftgeo migrate-sequential"
adds the catch-all denies when upgrading an older config.
Replies to your own connections are always accepted.
.PP
Append
.B log
to a rule to log the connections it matches, independently of
.BR LOG_DROPS .
Allows are logged with an
.B nftgeo-accept:<name>
prefix, denies with
.BR nftgeo-drop:<name> ,
where
.I name
is the rule's trailing
.B "# comment"
(view with
.BR "journalctl -k | grep nftgeo-" ).
The dashboard exposes the same toggle per rule.
.SS Ingress (early stateless drop)
.nf
.B "<accept|drop> <target> [proto] [port] [log]"
.fi
.PP
Rules in
.I /etc/nftgeo/ingress.conf
and
.IR /etc/nftgeo/ingress.d/*.conf
run in the nftables
.B ingress
hook \(em before prerouting and conntrack \(em matched on the source only (no
.BR dir ,
no connection state). Use it to shed the
.B abuse
set or bad geos very early under DDoS, before routing/conntrack cost. The
whitelist is always accepted first and can never be dropped here. The feature
is opt-in: if neither
.I ingress.conf
nor
.I ingress.d/*.conf
contains a rule, no ingress chain is emitted. It is an extra layer, not a
replacement for
.B "deny \(rs... abuse"
filter rules; being stateless it drops matching packets regardless of state.
Requires Linux \(>= 5.10 (inet ingress). Targets are the same as filter rules
(country/region/IP/CIDR/group/host/\fBany\fR/\fBabuse\fR). The ingress hook is
per-interface: set
.B INGRESS_DEV
(space-separated interface list) in the config, or the default-route interface
is auto-detected.
.SS Reactive throttle
.nf
.B "throttle <in|fwd-in> <tcp|udp> <port> <N/second|minute|hour> [ban <dur>] [on <iface>]"
.fi
.PP
Rate-limit new connections per source and auto-ban offenders (default ban
.BR THROTTLE_BAN ,
1h). Whitelisted sources are immune.
.SS SYN-flood protection (synproxy)
.nf
.B "synproxy <in|fwd-in> tcp <port> [on <iface>]"
.fi
.PP
Offload the TCP handshake to the kernel's synproxy so spoofed SYNs that never
complete it never reach the service. Runs before the allow rules.
.SS NAT (gateway)
.nf
.B "masquerade on <wan> [in <lan>]"
.B "snat out on <wan> to <ip> [in <lan>]"
.B "dnat <proto> <port> to <ip>[:<port>] [from <geo>] [on <iface>]"
.fi
.PP
.B masquerade
and
.B snat
emit a source-NAT postrouting chain;
.B dnat
emits a destination-NAT (port-forward) prerouting chain. Enable
.B net.ipv4.ip_forward=1
for routing.
.SS Inter-zone rules (internal firewall)
.nf
.B "<allow|deny> <zone> -> <zone> <proto> <port> [from <geo>]"
.fi
.PP
Zones are named interface lists
.RB ( ZONE_ NAME
in config, including VLAN subinterfaces such as
.BR eth0.100 ).
The rule matches the source zone's interfaces
.RB ( iifname )
against the destination zone's
.RB ( oifname )
in the forward chain;
.B from <geo>
layers a source-geo set on top. With
.B SEGMENT_DEFAULT="deny"
all forwarded traffic between zone interfaces that no rule allows is dropped.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Settings live in
.IR /etc/nftgeo/config ;
object definitions may also live in
.IR /etc/nftgeo/groups.d/*.conf .
Selected keys:
.TP
.B WHITELIST ", " WHITELIST_HOSTS
Addresses / hostnames that are never blocked (checked before every rule).
Preferred storage is
.I /etc/nftgeo/whitelist.conf
and
.I /etc/nftgeo/whitelist-hosts.conf
(one entry per line), editable from the dashboard through the draft/commit
deadman; each file is authoritative when it has any entry, otherwise these
config variables are used.
.TP
.B DEFAULT_INPUT
.B accept
(default, selective blocklist) or
.B drop
(default-deny input). Under
.BR drop ,
loopback, established/related, whitelist and explicit
.B allow in
rules still pass; deploy behind the
.B apply --confirm
deadman.
.TP
.B DEFAULT_OUTPUT ", " DEFAULT_FORWARD
.B accept
(default) or
.B drop
(strict egress / strict routing). Under
.BR drop ,
only established/related, loopback, essential ICMPv6, and explicit
.B allow out
/
.B allow fwd-*
rules pass \(em new outbound (DNS, updates) is blocked unless allowed. Deploy
behind the deadman.
.TP
.B HARDEN
Non-empty enables baseline hardening (accept loopback, drop invalid, essential
ICMPv6, and rate-limit inbound ping via
.BR ICMP_RATE / ICMP_BURST ).
.TP
.B ANTISPOOF
Space-separated interface list to protect with a strict reverse-path filter
(anti-spoofing); drops IPv4 packets whose source is not routable back through
the arrival interface. Applied to the input and forward chains.
.TP
.B LOG_DROPS
Non-empty logs dropped packets with an
.B nftgeo-drop:<reason>
prefix (view with
.BR "journalctl -k | grep nftgeo-drop" ).
.TP
.B NFLOG_GROUP
NFLOG multicast group (default 5) that every
.B log
packet is also delivered to, so the dashboard can build the drop map/stats
inside LXC/OpenVZ containers where the kernel log is the host's and unreadable.
Set to 0 to disable NFLOG and use the kernel log only.
.TP
.B LOG_WHITELIST
Non-empty logs whitelist hits (rate-limited) with an
.B nftgeo-accept:whitelist
prefix, so you can see which whitelisted sources actually connect. Independent
of
.BR LOG_DROPS ;
shares
.BR LOG_LIMIT .
.TP
.B SEGMENT_DEFAULT
.B deny
enables default-deny between zone interfaces.
.TP
.B ABUSEIPDB_API_KEY ", " ABUSE_FEEDS
Populate the
.B abuse
blocklist from AbuseIPDB and/or extra netset/plaintext feeds.
.TP
.B ABUSE_FEEDS_MAX ", " ABUSE_FEEDS_AGGREGATE ", " ABUSE_FEEDS_BATCH ", " ABUSE_FEEDS_BATCH_SLEEP
Tune large blocklists:
.B ABUSE_FEEDS_MAX
caps entries kept per feed (default 200000, 0 = no cap);
.B ABUSE_FEEDS_AGGREGATE
(default 1) collapses abuse IPs into CIDR ranges before loading, using
.B iprange
/
.B aggregate6
when present;
.B ABUSE_FEEDS_BATCH
(default 0 = off) loads a set larger than this in paced chunks of this size,
pausing
.B ABUSE_FEEDS_BATCH_SLEEP
seconds between chunks so a huge feed cannot spike load average.
.TP
.BI REGION_ NAME ", " GROUP_ NAME ", " SERVICE_ NAME ", " HOST_ NAME ", " ZONE_ NAME
Reusable region, address-group, service, host-label and zone objects referenced
by their lowercased suffix in rules.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/config
Settings.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/rules.conf
Main rule set.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/rules.d/*.conf
Additional rule fragments, loaded in sorted filename order.
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/ingress.conf ", " /etc/nftgeo/ingress.d/*.conf
Ingress-hook rules (early stateless drop).
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/groups.d/*.conf
GROUP_ / REGION_ / SERVICE_ / HOST_ / ZONE_ object definitions.
.TP
.I /etc/nftables.d/nftgeo.nft
The generated, loaded ruleset.
.TP
.I /var/lib/nftgeo/
State: cached country zones, feeds, dynamic blocks, and ruleset generations.
.TP
.I /var/lib/nftgeo/status.json
Run status written after every run: AbuseIPDB API key presence, last
AbuseIPDB/geo fetch timestamps, and warnings collected during the run. Read by
the dashboard.
.SH EXAMPLES
Allow inbound SSH from Poland while preserving access for a whitelisted admin.
The final deny is required when
.B DEFAULT_INPUT=accept
(the default):
.PP
.RS
.nf
# /etc/nftgeo/whitelist.conf
203.0.113.10

# /etc/nftgeo/rules.conf
allow in tcp 22 pl
deny  in tcp 22 any
.fi
.RE
.PP
Drop blocklisted sources before conntrack. This optional rule belongs in
.IR /etc/nftgeo/ingress.conf :
.PP
.RS
.nf
drop abuse
.fi
.RE
.PP
Block a scanner right now for two days:
.PP
.RS
.nf
nftgeo block 203.0.113.7 2d
.fi
.RE
.PP
Apply a risky change safely:
.PP
.RS
.nf
nftgeo apply --confirm 300
# ... verify you still have access ...
nftgeo apply --commit
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nft (8),
.BR nftables (8)
.PP
Full documentation:
.IR /usr/share/doc/nftgeo/README.md ,
.IR /usr/share/doc/nftgeo/REFERENCE.md ,
and examples under
.IR /usr/share/doc/nftgeo/examples/ .
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the nftgeo project.
