.\" nftgeo-update(8) manual page
.TH NFTGEO-UPDATE 8 "2026-07-12" "nftgeo 1.72.10" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
nftgeo-update \- render, validate, and load the nftgeo nftables ruleset
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nftgeo-update
.br
.B nftgeo-update
.RB [ --version | -V ]
.br
.B nftgeo-update --services
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nftgeo-update
is the nftgeo generation engine. It reads
.BR nftgeo.conf (5),
resolves required country zones and abuse feeds, renders an
.BR nftables (8)
ruleset, validates it with
.BR "nft -c" ,
and replaces the
.B inet nftgeo
table.
.PP
Normal operators should use
.BR nftgeo (8)
or start
.BR nftgeo.service .
The service is triggered periodically by
.B nftgeo.timer
to refresh cached source data. Running the engine directly requires root when
it writes state or loads nftables.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR --version , " " -V
Print the engine version and exit.
.TP
.B --services
Print built-in service names and their port definitions, one per line, then
exit. A user
.B SERVICE_
definition with the same name takes precedence.
.SH OPERATION
Only geo countries referenced by policy are downloaded. AbuseIPDB and custom
feeds are fetched only when a rule targets
.BR abuse .
Successful downloads are cached; a failed refresh reuses suitable cached data
where the configured retention policy allows it.
.PP
The complete candidate ruleset is checked before the existing table is
replaced. With
.B ABUSE_FEEDS_BATCH=0
the replacement, including abuse sets, is atomic. With batching enabled, the
validated policy is loaded with empty abuse sets and the sets are populated in
paced chunks.
.PP
A successful run writes the generated file and JSON status. It preserves live
counters where rules can be matched between generations.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The service normally obtains policy settings from
.IR /etc/nftgeo/config .
The following environment variables primarily support testing, alternate
layouts, and the operator CLI.
.TP
.BR CONFIG_FILE , " " RULES_FILE , " " RULES_DIR
Override the main configuration, rule file, and rule-fragment directory.
.TP
.BR INGRESS_FILE , " " INGRESS_DIR , " " GROUPS_DIR
Override ingress and object-definition paths.
.TP
.BR WHITELIST_FILE , " " WHITELIST_HOSTS_FILE
Override whitelist list paths.
.TP
.BR STATE_DIR , " " ZONE_DIR , " " NFT_FILE
Override runtime state, country cache, and generated-ruleset paths.
.TP
.BR TABLE_FAMILY , " " TABLE_NAME
Override the generated nftables table identity. Defaults: inet and nftgeo.
.TP
.B RENDER_ONLY
When non-empty, render and validate without loading nftables or replacing the
installed ruleset. Used by
.BR "nftgeo validate" .
.TP
.B RENDER_OUT
With render-only mode, write the candidate ruleset to this path. Used by
.BR "nftgeo plan" .
.TP
.B NFTGEO_SKIP_NFT_CHECK
Skip
.B nft -c
validation when non-empty. Intended only for offline test fixtures; do not use
for deployment.
.TP
.BR LOCK_FILE , " " LOCK_WAIT
Override the update lock path and maximum lock wait.
.TP
.BR IPDENY_V4_URL , " " IPDENY_V6_URL , " " ABUSEIPDB_URL
Override upstream data endpoints. Primarily useful for controlled tests or a
trusted internal mirror.
.PP
All policy variables described in
.BR nftgeo.conf (5)
may also be supplied in the environment. Values sourced from configuration
take precedence according to normal shell assignment semantics.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Rules were successfully rendered and validated, and were loaded unless
render-only mode was selected.
.TP
.B non-zero
Configuration, resolution, rendering, validation, locking, or nftables loading
failed. The previously loaded table is retained when failure occurs before
replacement.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/nftgeo/config
Main configuration.
.TP
.IR /etc/nftgeo/rules.conf , " " /etc/nftgeo/rules.d/*.conf
Filter, NAT, zone, throttle, and synproxy policy.
.TP
.IR /etc/nftgeo/ingress.conf , " " /etc/nftgeo/ingress.d/*.conf
Early ingress policy.
.TP
.I /etc/nftables.d/nftgeo.nft
Last generated ruleset.
.TP
.I /var/lib/nftgeo/
Cached source data, status, dynamic state, locks, and generations.
.TP
.I /var/lib/nftgeo/status.json
Machine-readable outcome, source freshness, and warnings from the last run.
.SH EXAMPLES
Run an immediate update through systemd and inspect the result:
.PP
.RS
.nf
systemctl start nftgeo.service
systemctl show nftgeo.service -p Result -p ExecMainStatus
journalctl -u nftgeo.service -n 50 --no-pager
.fi
.RE
.PP
Render and validate through the supported operator interface:
.PP
.RS
.nf
nftgeo validate
nftgeo plan
.fi
.RE
.PP
List built-in service aliases:
.PP
.RS
.nf
nftgeo-update --services
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nftgeo (8),
.BR nftgeo.conf (5),
.BR nftgeo-ui (8),
.BR nft (8),
.BR nftables (8),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR systemd.service (5),
.BR systemd.timer (5)
